Estrogens are a group of
25 steroid hormones
that regulate several body functions
in both men and women.
In women, it is the primary sex hormone
and is produced in the ovaries
from cholesterol.
It is released into the
blood stream from the ovaries,
and within seconds it is transported
to all parts of the body.
Estrogen works by crossing into
body cells through a pore
in the cell membrane
and binds with an estrogen receptor.
The receptor-estrogen complex
enters the nucleus,
binds with DNA,
and creates messenger RNA
or MRNA.
MRNA leaves the nucleus
and enters the endoplasmic reticulum,
where it creates a specific protein.
Proteins are involved in all
processes within the body.
When estrogen levels fall during menopause,
fewer of certain proteins are made
which causes changes in how
the body functions.
One of the effects is to change
the hypothalamic thermostat
that controls how you perceive hot and cold.
A room that used to feel normal
now feels hot.
Your body’s response to heat
is to trigger sweating
and dilates skin’s surface vessels
causing flushing of the skin,
called a hot flash.